would you believe that walruses
rattlesnakes and parakeets all once
lived in the same house let's go back
about 350 million years look around
steamy swamps and rainforests of
horsetails and ferns cover the region
amphibians are the dominant land
vertebrates they range in size from
newts to crocodiles and all require
water to do their egg-laying if they
don't go to the water their shell lists
jelly like eggs will dry out because of
this hazard they spend most of their
time living in or near fresh water that
is until a breakthrough in evolution
changes everything the amniotic egg the
amniotic egg is shelled waterproof and
can be laid on dry land it is produced
by the amniotes
a new group of animals named after their
revolutionary egg the first amniote is a
tetrapod a four-legged animal resembling
a small lizard while some amphibians can
walk around on land and bury their eggs
in wet soil or highly humid areas
nothing before the amniotes has the
ability to lay its eggs on completely
dry land because of this evolved egg the
amniotes are the first animals with the
ability to live a fully terrestrial life
but despite their move inland the
amniotes have not abandoned their pond
dwelling upbringing in fact the amniotic
egg brings the pond with them by
enclosing the aquatic environment within
its shell this is achieved by four main
upgrades that are unique to amniotic
eggs let's take a closer look the first
development is the most obvious the eggs
protective shell it's tough but flexible
and has a leathery surface still seen in
some reptile eggs today the shell
protects the eggs from predators
bacteria damage and drying out but
unlike the walls of a fish tank the
shell of the amniotic egg is porous
allowing oxygen to pass through so that
the growing amniote inside doesn't
suffocate the next two developments are
two separate membranes that work
together like a pair of lungs they bring
oxygen into the embryo while removing
carbon dioxide the first is the chorion
which is the protective layer
that oxygen passes through after
entering the shells tiny pores you may
recognize the chorion as the thin skin
you peel away on a hard-boiled egg think
of this waterproof membrane as the in
and out doors of the egg it's the
entrance for oxygen and exit for carbon
dioxide the membrane working with the
chorion is the allantois if the chorion
is the doors then the atlantis is
essentially the lobby of the building it
directs the oxygen and carbon dioxide
while simultaneously storing unneeded
waste from the embryo the chorion and
the atlanta the embryo has everything it
needs and gets rid of anything it
doesn't the last and perhaps the most
important development is the amnion the
membrane for which the egg is named the
amnion is also contained within the
chorion and holds the fluid in which the
embryo floats because it has left the
watery world of the amphibians the
amnion is necessary for preventing the
embryo from drying out it is the
transportable pond that allows the
amniote to lay the egg on dry land it's
fluid also protects the embryo from any
collisions or rough landings like a
shock absorber on your bike or car
together the shell and these four
membranes create a safe watery
environment for the embryo to grow and
develop the new amniote offspring will
continue the process of vertebrate
evolution as it explores new land away
from the water they will spend the next
million years splitting into two
distinct groups the synapsids
and sirop seeds synapse Ida is the group
of animals that contain mammals while
sauropsida is the group that contains
reptiles birds and dinosaurs these two
amniotic groups collectively contain the
walruses rattlesnakes and parakeets we
know today like a family reunion with
relatives of every shape and size coming
together from different corners of the
earth these animals can all call one
place home the amniotic egg
you